feat: "Mock database in Svelte e2e tests with drizzle and playwright fixtures" blog post (#2770)
mainmatter/mainmatter.com: src/posts/2025-08-21-mock-database-in-svelte-tests.md

Even with this very simple example we cut the total time in half because we don't need to request additional data: once the page is on the client, that's it.

## The problem

As we hinted before, this approach sounds like the most reasonable...there's a problem however: testability! Doing end-to-end tests when a database is involved is not an easy task and while, to be frank, this mostly boils down to the lack of mocking ability of the database drivers, it's definitely something to keep in mind.

Now one of the solutions could be to simply add an API layer in front of our db and mock that, or we could contain all our db access into a single module and mock that module during testing, but both are not ideal: the first one adds an unnecessary network jump, the second one forces us to structure our code in a certain way and we are one new hire away from messing up that structure (and we would also need to reimplement all the logic in the mocking module).

> What we really want is a way to write our code just like we want with the ability to interact with the database from our tests.

Author: Oh gotcha...i think there was a missing colon but your suggestion is better anyway

export const test = base.extend<{ db: typeof db; schema: typeof schema }>({
  db: async ({}, use) => {
    await seed(db as never, schema);
    await use(db);
    await reset(db as never, schema);
  },
  schema: async ({}, use) => {
    await use(schema);
  },
});
```

The last thing that we need to do is actually migrate our db when we launch our test suite...we can do this in `playwright.config.ts`

```ts
import { defineConfig } from "@playwright/test";
import { migrate } from "drizzle-orm/libsql/migrator";
import { db } from "./src/lib/server/db/index.js";

migrate(db, {
  migrationsFolder: "./drizzle",
});

export default defineConfig({
  webServer: {
    command: "pnpm build && pnpm preview",
    port: 4173,
  },
  testDir: "e2e",
});
```

And just like that we have access to our db in each test

```ts
import { expect } from "@playwright/test";
import { test } from "./index.js";

test("home page has the right first user", async ({ page, db, schema }) => {
  const first_user = await db.select().from(schema.user).limit(1).get();
  await page.goto("/");
  await expect(page.locator("li").first()).toHaveText(
    `${first_user?.id} - ${first_user?.name}`
  );
});
```

> If we launch our Playwright tests with UI using `pnpm test:e2e -- --ui` we can see that the test passes and we have 10 users in our db!

Author: Noted, will update that

We then invoke `await use` passing a value...this value needs to be the type we are defining in the `extend` generic (in this case `string`). This function call will resolve once the test has finished, we can now clean things up.

If we now import this `test` function in our test files we can use it like this

```ts
import { expect } from "@playwright/test";
import { test } from "../index.js";

test("my fixture", async ({ my_fixture }) => {
  expect(my_fixture).toBe("fixture_value");
});
```

Can you see where this is going? With this method we can provide our tests with an access to our `db`!

```ts
/* eslint-disable no-empty-pattern */
import { test as base } from "@playwright/test";
import { db } from "../src/lib/server/db/index.js";

export const test = base.extend<{ db: typeof db }>({
  db: async ({}, use) => {
    // your setup code here
    await use(db);
    // your cleanup code here
  },
});
```

This is already a huge step forward but we can also do better...as we said, we want to seed our db before every test and reset it after...let's see how it works with `drizzle-seed`

#### Putting it all together

> Now that we understand how fixtures work we can use the `seed` and `reset` functions from `drizzle-seed`...the `seed` function will generate 10 random (but seeded, so consistent) users in out DB...we can do this before calling `use` to add the users to our database before the test start. After `use` we also invoke `reset` that takes care of wiping our db completely so it will be ready for the next iteration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we understand how fixtures work we can use the `seed` and `reset` functions from `drizzle-seed`...the `seed` function will generate 10 random (but seeded, so consistent) users in our DB...we can do this before calling `use` to add the users to our database before the test start. After `use` we also invoke `reset` that takes care of wiping our db completely so it will be ready for the next iteration.
```

  await expect(page.locator("li").first()).toHaveText(
    `${first_user?.id} - ${first_user?.name}`
  );
});

test.describe("empty database", () => {
  test.use({
    seed: {
      user: [],
    },
  });

  test("home page has no users", async ({ page }) => {
    await page.goto("/");
    await expect(page.locator("li")).toHaveCount(0);
  });
});

test.describe("one specific user", () => {
  test.use({
    seed: {
      user: [
        {
          id: 1,
          name: "Paolo Ricciuti",
        },
      ],
    },
  });

  test("home page has a single user", async ({ page }) => {
    await page.goto("/");
    await expect(page.locator("li")).toHaveText(`1 - Paolo Ricciuti`);
  });
});
```

Personally I would suggest to default to this strategy if you need to make assertions on the data and use the `seed` function only for the cases where you need "some" data to be there but you don't care about which data is it.

And that's it! All of this can be further improved using the `refine` function of `drizzle-seed` (more documentation on the package [here](https://orm.drizzle.team/docs/seed-overview)) but now that you know the basics the world is your playground!

#### A small caveat

> There's a small caveat here that I've kept hidden from you this whole time: given we only have one SvelteKit application running we can only have one db. This means that every test needs to run in series otherwise two tests will update the data of the db at the same time. This is pretty straightforward to do in your `playwright.config.ts` by setting the number of workers to 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a small caveat here that I've kept hidden from you this whole time: given we only have one SvelteKit application running we can only have one db. This means that tests cannot run in parallel but have to run in sequence. Otherwise two tests could update the data of the db at the same time. This is pretty straightforward to do in your `playwright.config.ts` by setting the number of workers to 1
```
